---
layout: post
title:  "Arrogant Rationalism"
date:   2019-12-13 00:00:00 +0400
---

Scientists possess more scientific knowledge than the average human. It is implied by the job title itself---scientists, those who “do science” for a living. But science is the thing that contains all known logical knowledge about the universe. Hence, scientists often think that they know more about how the world works, which is kinda true. They also tend to be more logically consistent by the very facts that they are doing science and that science must be logically consistent because without logical consistency, one might as well claim anything one wants.

It is usually the case that science, which is largely based on rational thinking and the scientific method, is a superior school of thought compared to traditional ones in almost all disciplines. There is something so useful about science that makes people from everywhere adopt it to solve their problems. It's probably related to its ability to predict and explain an outcome of a phenomenon based on a logically consistent model of that phenomenon. Problem solving, basically. More often than not, this ability makes scientists believe that they have some sort of a bestowed authority on topics that require logical reasoning. They believe that they can always make better decisions and solve problems more efficiently. In a way, they're right. However, experience and guts can triumph over meticulous logical reasoning sometimes, so scientists do fail---naively so in some cases. But seriously, why do scientists with their superior rational thinking and the acclaimed scientific method ever fail? Well, I believe scientists fail because either: 1) their logically consistent model is inherently wrong, or (this is usually the case) 2) their models don't apply to the real world very well, which also invalidates some of their explanations about why the modeled phenomenon happened.

There is a mode of thinking where scientists or rational people hold very tightly and dearly to their "beautiful" theories, which turn out to be prone to naive failures in hindsight. I like to call that *arrogant rationalism*. Since this mode of thinking is adopted by a wider subset of people that encompass *some* scientists, I will refrain from simply using the vague term "*some* scientists" to describe these people. Instead, I will use the term "arrogantly-rational people" as it is more self-descriptive. These people are implicitly arrogant in their assertions and think that the opinions of the non-scientifically-oriented community is, well, bullshit-ish, so to speak. In other words, they think their opinons are based on lies, norms, biases, and/or emotions. These people might use (pseudo-)science to over-analyze every phenomenon, thinking that their scientifically-sound assumptions are often valid and make sense in the real world. They comment on every topic, thinking that the scientific method and logical consistency of *their* world model can solve everything. Unfortunately, life is never that simple. The model that works today for you might not work tomorrow, and some systems are just too damn complex to explain using a few explanatory variables (especially and particularly systems that involve human decisions, which includes stock markets, for example).

Most humans eventually make (a lot of) subtle mistakes in their logical reasoning. Sometimes, decisions based on simple hands-on experience can beat the shit out of the classical scientific method when used naively. There is nothing wrong with science, it’s just that, sometimes, it is difficult to *do science* correctly and apply it to the real world, at least at the current state of science. Think about the science of *love*, for example, and how useless it might be (I may be wrong though). Maybe one day we will find a rigorous scientific theory of love that let us make reliable predictions and marry people to each other efficiently so that everyone can be happy, but right now, nah. I don't think any scientific model of love would cut it in the real world. This is exactly one of these topics where experience would pat science on the back and say: "Step back, buddy". In general, rational thinkers face this hurdle when they try analyze complex social phenomena based on logic alone because these phenomena include things like emotions that might come up as unexplainable, complex randomness that might siginificatly impact the model's outcome (again, stock markets is a good example, which is why sentiment analysis is gaining tract in algorithmic trading). When we reach the level where we can scientifically model the human brain exactly, experience might then be explained away from within this model and thus be beaten by any rational thinking based on this model, arrogant or not. For now, such a model seems to be quite far-fetched from the current reality of science.

So when should arrogantly-rational people stop being overly confident about their theories and experiments? In my opinion, it is healthy to criticize oneself every now and then and assume that one is wrong, and then revalidate one's own views. Sometimes, the people who are not making any sense to you right now might actually be making a lot of sense when you look at it from a different perspective. Just start with their mindset and come to their conclusions from there, and maybe you will find something along the way. And if you didn’t, well... just move on. There will always be wrong people out there, and you don’t always have to convince everybody on the planet that your world model is more sound and logically consistent than theirs. Remember, your world model might be only true in your mindset alone and not necessarily in others'. You will never *completely understand* other people. Don’t be *arrogantly* rational, be *wisely* rational.
