---
layout: post
title:  "The Truman Show Syndrome"
date:   2019-10-22 03:46:55 +0400
---

If you know the movie *The Truman Show*, then you know what I’m talking about, and you’ve seen this *syndrome* before. I’ve personally seen it a lot in my life. Guess where? LA, the land of Hollywood, baby.

Some people act as if they are being constantly filmed by an invisible camera through their whole lives. But unlike Truman, they know they’re being filmed, and, again, unlike Truman, the hidden cameras don’t exist. So why did I call it The Truman Show Syndrome? Well... I don’t know.

In any case, please don’t be like that. People who do that are annoying and self-centered. I feel like these kind of people like to post a lot of selfies on Instagram. In particular, they like to post a sequence of slightly perturbed selfies (for example, one selfie with a smile, one selfie without a smile, repeat with slightly different angles, black and white etc). Yes, we get how cool you look in all of these angles, and we did notice that the first selfie is slightly different than the second one, yet they both convey a different level of coolness that we have to be aware of.

It’s not coincidence that this type of behavior is prevalent in Hollywood. Have you noticed that some actors like to act what they want to be? For example, some actors like to act in roles in which they are strong, sexy, beautiful, badass, and heros because *they want to be exactly that*. These actors always act the same roles because **they’re not really acting, they’re just being themselves**. They have a cool character in real life, and they just adapt it to new settings with different backstories. They don't like to be in roles in which they are not cool (this is why there aren't that many uncool Hollywood actors). Remind me of a role in which Brad Pitt portrayed a loser. Even loser roles in Hollywood are transformed in the context of the film into a cool role! Have you seen Jonah Hill in 21 Jump Street, for example? Rebecca Wilson, etc. One obvious example that I also have to mention is The Rock. He’s a very famous actor because he’s The Rock, not because he’s a great actor (which is not a bad thing to say about him, per se). I don't even remember when he started acting. I used to like The Rock since WWF. He was my favorite wrestler because I thought he was really cool (have you smelled what The Rock was cooking?) Well, I guess some people are just so damn lucky that their personas are so like-able, they can gain money by simply existing. In fact, this seems to be true for existence itself. Losers don't have as many friends as cool people because nobody wants to see more of losers and less of cool people, so cool people tend to have more opportunities and easier time in their lives. Same for Hollywood. Who wants to see a movie about a loser who didn't do anything significant in their lives? The problem is that we are categorizing people into "cool people" and "loser people". Some people actually watch movies for the *acting*, believe it or not! Acting as in accurately portraying a role from a novel or from history no matter how uncool that role is. However, seems like nowadays we only want to see movies about cool people, so Hollywood movies tend to be biased toward cool culture. A movie about a loser can be a masterpiece, but it will surely be boring except for movie critics who appreciate good acting.

So how does this relate to *The Truman Show Syndrome*? Well, it's about the very thin line between *acting* and *being*. We act everyday because of social norms and personal goals. It is very natural to behave differently depending on the context. It's as if we are projecting our *selves* on a 3D screen, poetically speaking. Consider this scenario: what if you wake up tomorrow realizing that you used to be the head of the largest secret criminal organization in the world, and your brain was, in fact, erased temporarily and timed to retreive its memories on this very day. And let's say you found papers and proofs to make it even more dramatic. You have two options now: 1) *act* like you were before coming into this weird realization and not embrace your true self, living your everyday life like you used to, ignoring the **fact** that you are not truly the person you are *acting* like right now (i.e. you are not truly the normal, boring person you are acting like), or 2) embrace your true self and *not act*, which is itself *acting like you're not acting* until you completely adapt to your criminal overlord personality.

We all have images of ourselves in our heads, and it feels like this body is only a medium for our minds to act in this world, so we will always **act** what we are and what we want to be. The only difference with actors is that they try to "wake up" in a movie ready to embrace their newly realized, imaginary selves.

