---
layout: post
title:  "Deep Success"
date:   2019-12-12 00:00:00 +0400
---

The most troubling trend in with the way of life of some of the most successful people is that they optimize their lives for success (*duh*), but success itself is a quality that is measured by some standards other **people** set. You can’t simply claim that you are successful because you see yourself so. It can definitely happen, but it's gonna be pathetic and sad as we all know. You have to make people decide whether you are successful or not. So being successful does not make sense without relying on people’s opinions. Whose opinion you rely on is something that only you can decide.

If you rely on your own opinion, then you will very likely end up having delusions of grandeur or commit suicide. If you rely on society’s opinion, then you might end up living like a robot; going through a pre-defined life of typical, boring success. Both options are viable, but something in between ought to hit the sweet spot where you can find the perfect mix of satisfying internal opinions (one’s validation of oneself) and external opinions (others’ validation of oneself).

Looking at it this way, we are just trying to satisfy everybody’s definition of success---including ours, of course---to varying degrees that depend on complex social relationships. For example, satisfying your family is more important than satisfying a bunch of strangers you saw on the street who wants you to pay for their bus ticket home. The more attached you are to a group of people, the more you want to satisfy their standards of success and seek their validations. People who fall in love, for example, might do some crazy stuff just to seek the validation of their potential partners (i.e. crush) or loved ones since they are very strongly attached to them.

The problem of achieving *success* in the sense that one is living life *correctly* (to some extent) requires a healthy mix of validations from many reliable sources. But the older one gets, the smaller the list of external validations one needs. At the end, you will only care about yourself (and perhaps your partner), so success, as others see it, wouldn’t mean shit to you. Your definition of success would be to live through your daily routine as accurately as possible without any interruptions or distractions. In fact, many people regret not spending time with their families (and especially their parents) in their youth, no matter how successful they become. They regret it because their definition of *success*, as in succeeding to live a *good life*, has changed with time and become less concerned with materialistic achievements and mere number games. Success becomes more complex and deep, and starts to signify something deeper, more long-term, and more meaningful.

After all, meanings are subjective, and what success means to you may be completely different to another. In fact, that other person might be you in the future. So which kind of success should one thrive to achieve? Think about people who die young, for example. They won’t regret the fun they had and the non-responsible actions they took during their short lives (e.g. smoking and doing drugs, disrespecting people, not following the rules, bad relationship with family, etc.). It is true that they died young, which is an inevitable "failure" that successful people always try to avoid (as in, they try to stay alive as long as possible). However, their death might have had nothing to do with what they did (e.g. they died in a airplane crash). Therefore, we can safely say that they actually lived a fun, albeit short, life without consequences, and that’s something you can call success! (Unless they really preferred to live a longer life, of course, but they died, so...) If you knew you were gonna die young, what kind of successful life would you prefer? Will you still seek fame and money? Will you commit crimes for your own satisfaction if you were to die tomorrow? Or will you cherish your last moments with the people you love the most? What really makes you choose the path you take? And would your view of success change by knowing a little bit of the future and why?

People are (biologically) similar in the way they think, so they usually form similar opinions, but that doesn’t make the different opinions any less "correct". I can convince myself that success is all about gaining more knowledge, and treat success in every context by that definition, and therefore, aim to gain more knowledge, disregarding money, happiness, and love, which are things that consitute other people's whole lives. Nobody can prove me wrong; it’s just that my opinion is a radical one and yours is a general one.

People are social creatures, they are not programmed to live alone. Words like “success” and “fame” do not really make sense in non-social settings, so their meanings are deeply intertwined with they way society perceive those labels and use them. So what is really meant by “deep success” or “meaningful life”? I believe it boils down to the way society views the idealistic individual, where society is a group of people living together and sharing resources (and thus, interact non-trivially by altering others' welfare). The collection of views converge to the average successful individual in society (with the whole collective group bias, of course), but radical (i.e. outlier) views of success can possibly exist within large subgroups as well, though with a smaller probability as the subgroup gets larger.

As you can tell, we can’t conclude anything of substantial value about the secrets of deep, meaningful success. This is because there are no secrets, only subjectivity and ambiguity. Nonetheless, I will end this essay with my humble opinion. 

To be successful is to live happily (convinced and content with your current state of affairs), sufficiently (have enough resources to maintain your current state of affairs), and actively (play a non-trivial role in society by interacting with other's state of affairs). You have to be, overall, convinced that your life is good. It might seem exaggerated in simplicity, but it is not. Money helps, but it isn’t really success as we all know; it’s just merchandise with special consensus-based superpowers. Fame is easy to achieve without being successful (do something extremely stupid in public. Boom. You’re famous). Sex gets boring after a while (look at all the hot celebrity couples getting divorced). What remains is your own (long-term) progress in life and how content you are with it. The three conditions I gave ensure that you are happy and can stay happy in a non-trivial manner (interacting with people ensures that you are not being deluded into a lonely hole of idiosyncratic happiness, so it is a certificate or a validation of happiness that our curious brains seem to need).

Overall, if your path in life is a happy path, and the people you care about can certify that in their actions, and perhaps most importantly, that **you are convinced and content with your life**, then I think you pretty much succeeded in life. The Internet-generations experience enormous amount of stress and anxiety in their social lives because they might evaluate and validate their own happiness based on an extremely large pool of not-so-positive opinions and ideologies (i.e. the Internet), so they are under constant pressure to achieve an unrealistic form of success. They key is to be convinced that your life is happy, or otherwise, to work towards a reasonable goal and be content with as little as possible. There is nothing wrong with not being the best or not doing or seeing everything. The curiosity of the mind could lead it to the stars of sucess or to the depths of misery, irrespective of strong will and meticulous planning. It is your luck in life, or as Void from Berserk said "*Everything is within the flows of Causality*".
