---
layout: post
title:  Machine Learning Without Math
date:   2026-04-01 00:00:00 +0000
academic: false
---

In this post, I'll try to explain machine learning without math (well, almost).

Machine learning is mainly about prediction.
At least it could be framed in a predictive framework most of the time.
Machine learning is a process that takes an input $$x$$ and predicts an output $$y$$.
For example, in math (sorry), we can write this as $$y = f(x)$$.
Here, instead of computing $$y$$ given $$f$$ and $$x$$,
we compute $$f$$ itself given $$x$$ and $$y$$.

We call the pair $(x,y)$ **data**, and a set of such pairs a dataset.
$x$ could be literally anything.
It could come from different *modalities*, such as images, texts, 3D scans, tables, etc.
$y$ could also be literally anything.
It could be an image! Why not? When you ask ChatGPT to draw an image, this is what it is doing.
Your prompt is $x$ and $y$ is the image.
You shouldn't think of $y$ as a label only.
Just think of it as an output.
In the simplest case, $y$ is a binary label, so the **prediction** task becomes a **classification** task.
We can consider multiple labels as well.
For starters, we will see how this works for binary labels.

---

## Binary classification
Let us consider binary labels +1 and -1.
We consider a single real number as the output of $$f$$.
If $$f(x)$$ is bigger than 0, then we predict 1, otherwise we predict -1.
Pretty straightforward.

Let us consider a simple example.
Let $x$ be the number of hours a student studies, and $y$ is whether the grade is pass or fail (pass = +1, fail = -1).
We collect a bunch of data from past semesters on a tough course and get a silly histogram like this:

```
                                   + + +   
                               + + + + + + +   
                 - - - -     + + + + + + + + +  
               + - - - - - + + + + + + + + + + +
           - - - - - - - + - - + + + + + + + + + + +
    0hrs -------------------- 5hrs -------------------- 10hrs
```

A histogram is a graph that stacks outputs on top of each other within "bins".
Here, a bin stands for a specific number of hours, but they can also group together a bunch of nearby $x$ together to create a coarser graph.
The thinner the bins, the finer (but sometimes noisier) your histogram will look.

Ok, let's do machine learning.
In the above histogram, most of the students who passed studied 5+ hours.
Seems like 5 is the magic number; it's a **threshold** that *almost* guarantees that the student will pass the course.
We just did machine learning!

Indeed, what we did *is* machine learning but at its most primitive level.
We just plotted the data and **figured out a pattern for passing the course**.

### Modeling the problem
Machine learning formalizes and generalizes this whole process.
The **mathematical modeling** is to write down equations that describe your inputs and how they're mapped into outputs.
Machine learning is the science of figuring out the patterns.
It's often done with math because visualizing the data can only get you so far.

But why is it helpful?
Suppose we want to predict whether a random future student will pass or fail given the number of hours they studied.
Then, we can use a specific equation for predicting this.
This has the benefit of being standardized, automated, and less prone to human error from visual interpretation.
And when we talk about high-dimensional data, then visualization is out of reach, so machine learning becomes necessary to do any principled predictions.

#### Assumption 1: the data points are sampled iid
For example, in the above histogram, students who fail the course appear to have studied 3 hours on average, and 6 hours for those who passed.
Conditioned on knowing the student's passing grade, we can tell approximately how long they studied.

Let us take a random student from any past or future semester.
We assume the relation between study hours and grade to have the same effect.
This is a very important assumption in machine learning: we assume that our model will work in the future and will not drift.
Roughly speaking, this corresponds to the assumption that students from all semesters have identical studying habits and behave independently from each other.

More precisely, we assume that the observed data points $$(x_i, y_i)$$ are **iid** (independent and identically distributed), and this is a crude assumption that statisticians and machine learning researchers love to use because it simplifies things a lot.
This is the first part of our mathematical model.

Of course, in practice, data can drift and what used to work may not work anymore.
The simplest solution is to fit your model again on the new data.
This is an important area of research and is related to model adaptation, which is the study of making models adapt to shifting data domains.

#### Assumption 2: study hours are normally distributed within each class
Students who passed seem to be *randomly* scattered around some average number of study hours.
This is clear from the histogram.

When we say *random*, we usually think of the *normal* kind of randomness, the bell-shaped curve.
The special thing about this curve is that it arises naturally when we average independent quantities.
The dispersion around the average decays exponentially as you go further.
(There is also the box-shaped, uniform randomness, which arises naturally when the dispersion is bounded).

In the above, we can ignore the lower bound of 0 hours and assume unboundedness, which helps us justify our assumption that the bell-shaped curve is due to the normal distribution.
(It's true that you can't study *negative* hours, but you might slack so much that it would be like you're un-studying.)

This is the second part of our model.
**For a random passing student, we assume that the study hours are normally distributed around some average study time (and equivalently for failing students).**

We can also use fancier distributions, but let's stick to normal distribution with fixed widths (i.e., variance).
Note that this assumption does not meaningfully capture "long-tailed" effects, such as the outlier student who passed with only 2 hours of study,
since the probability of that happening under our model could be extremely low (depending on the variance).
Still, this model is *good enough* for our purposes.
Such sacrifices are normal when modeling real-world problems, and keeping track of these modeling inaccuracies and knowing what to keep and what to leave is an important part of mathematical modeling.


#### The Resulting Model
Based on these two assumptions, we can find a closed form expression for the best threshold using maximum likelihood estimation (see below).
If we further assume equal class priors and equal variance for the two bell curves, then the best threshold is exactly their midpoint.
If you do the math (which I won't lol), you will see that it is just $$(6+3)/2 = 4.5$$.
This is almost 5, so our theoretical result agrees with our visual intuition.

Our prediction model under the two assumptions can be written as: $$f(x)$$ = +1 if $$x > 4.5$$, -1 otherwise.
That's pretty much it.


### Model complexity
In practice, $x$ may be complicated and not necessarily normally distributed, and the rule for predicting $y$ may not be that simple.

For example, in surveys, there should be an upper limit on the number of study hours because students reporting an exorbitantly high number are lying to us, so we can deduce that they're likely to fail.
Math cannot elegantly capture this human intuition, but it's a valid model.
In that case, instead of using one threshold, we can use two! (Bet you didn't see that coming.)

But what if the data is more complicated, and there are also outlier students with specific patterns for predicting their success?
Should we add more thresholds?

As naive as a human decision can be in this scenario, this is one of the biggest conundrums of machine learning, and it's called the *bias-variance trade-off*.
As we make our predictor more complex, we make it more susceptible to *overfitting*, i.e., fitting to noise or patterns that don't exist.

Choosing the right complexity for the predictor is one of the main challenges in machine learning...
or it used to, until deep learning came and gave the middle finger to this Occam's razor logic.
Some modern research suggests that the classical trade-off is less drammatic than it sounds;
the real trade-off is much more subtle. Oh well.

Nowadays, deep learning models run efficiently on GPUs and scale up ad infinitum.
Deep learning is magical because its complexity adapts to the task.
You could have the equivalent of a million thresholds for this silly prediction problem of pass/fail, yet a deep learning model—a neural network—can still find a solution that generalizes surprisingly well.
To make things more confusing, the same model will gladly fit complete garbage random data perfectly, so it certainly *can* overfit if it wants to!

How is this possible?
Would you be surprised if I told you that **nobody really knows**?
Nobody has a satisfying general explanation of this phenomenon.
It's sadly true, but it's also exciting.
This is one of the most interesting questions in deep learning, and we still don't have a satisfying explanation.
The explanation that I like is that this *adaptive complexity* comes from the adaptive implicit regularization of neural networks, but let's keep that for another post.

### Finding the model that fits

Once we define our prediction model, the process of fitting it to the data might not always be direct.

It is often not possible to directly optimize the fitting objective, e.g., the expected risk.
One of the classic exceptions is linear regression, where the objective can be optimized directly and a closed form solution is attainable.
Otherwise, we have to formulate a sound optimization problem that: 1) fits the model satisfactorily, and 2) can be solved efficiently.

The canonical example in deep learning is digit classification on the MNIST dataset.
We minimize a loss function on MNIST and train a neural network with a gradient descent optimizer, such as SGD or Adam.
We fit the model well enough (e.g., 98% accuracy) with an efficient algorithm (e.g., runs on one GPU in a few minutes).

Despite the simplicity above, problem formulation remains very important.
However, the beauty of our modern models—those obscenely large neural networks—lies in their robustness to bullshit modeling.
Namely, you can design all kinds of neural network pipelines for solving a bunch of complex tasks, and you can still mess up quite a lot and add unnecessary tricks without getting hurt by your own bullshit.
At the end of the day, if your loss function is supposed to do something, and the algorithm is working, then your neural network is gonna do that thing and it will generalize well for you because it's very kind to us, or as Noam Shazeer puts it: "it's divine benevolence".

Nonetheless, it is important to understand that, despite the robustness of the neural networks, we still have to make sure that we are solving the right problem.
Your loss function should make sense.


## Regression
Now what if we want to predict the actual grade instead of pass or fail?
Instead of $$y$$ being -1 or +1, we want $$y$$ to be a real number.

Let us consider the same data, but with actual grades instead. Here is the plot:

```
                                   7 8 9   
                               7 7 7 7 8 8 9   
                 3 3 4 4     2 7 7 6 7 8 8 8 9  
               2 2 2 4 4 4 4 5 7 6 6 7 7 7 8 8 9
           1 2 6 1 2 2 3 5 5 8 6 6 6 7 6 7 7 7 7 8
    0hrs -------------------- 5hrs -------------------- 10hrs
```

Since the points have a numerical value, we can rely on the vertical axis to represent this numerical value to get a better visualization:
```
    9 |                                       1   1 1 1       
    8 |                             1       1 2 2 2 1   1     
    7 |                               3 2 2 4 1 2 1 1 1       
    6 |               1               1 2 3   1               
    5 |                         1 1 1                        
    4 |                     2 2 1 1                            
    3 |                 1 1   1                                
    2 |             1 1 1 2 1                                  
    1 |           1     1                                     
grade |    0hrs -------------------- 5hrs -------------------- 10hrs
```

The numbers represent the frequency of students who got that grade given the number of study hours.
We can see a clear linear trend; the number of study hours predicts the grade reliably, except for some outlier cases.
In math, a linear equation is represented as $$\textsf{grade} = a \cdot \textsf{hours} + b$$, where $$a$$ and $$b$$ are some numbers that we can figure out with algebra.
That's linear regression in a nutshell.

---

## Binary Classification > Regression

[*This section has math. Boooo 👻*]

It's tempting to say that regression generalizes binary classification.
Indeed, we can easily get +1 and -1 from a real number using a thresholding rule.
In the above case, if a grade is 5 or more, it gets a +1. Otherwise, it gets a -1.

However, I will show you that the opposite is true in a deeper sense.
Namely, I'll show the counter-intuitive fact that binary classification can be at least as general a predictive framework as regression!

### Why is (Binary) Classification > Regression?

First of all, the given data points in the above case are the number of study hours, usually called the regressor, input, or $$X$$.
What we want to predict is whether a student passes or fails. They call what we want to predict the regressand, label, output, or $$Y$$.

In the regression case, the predicted grade is $$\textsf{grade} = a \cdot \textsf{hours} + b$$.
What about binary classification?
That's the part where people jump to conclusion quickly and think of prediction in terms of bits.
In learning theory / decision science, we represent a binary prediction as a **probability**:

$$
\Pr[\textsf{pass} = +1 | \textsf{hours} = x],
$$

which is read as the "probability of passing given $$x$$ hours of study" (we'll skip $$x$$ sometimes for clarity).
Probabilities have values in [0, 1], but we can easily map them to [-1, +1], and vice versa; it's just a convention.
The fact that binary classification is learning a *conditional probability function* under the hood changes the picture completely.

Instead of interpreting $$\textsf{grade} \to \textsf{pass}$$ as a conversion from a real number to a bit,
we can interpret it as a data generating process $$\Pr[\textsf{pass}] \to \textsf{grade}$$ relating uncertainty about passing to an observed grade.
That is a very Bayesian way of looking at things.
One could choose to view the grade as a rescaled belief/credence/probability of passing, say from 0 to 9.
There is no absolute reality; just different ways of looking at things and modeling them.

Ok, but how do we learn $$f(x) = \Pr[\textsf{pass} | \textsf{hours} = x]$$, which would then give us $$\textsf{grade}$$ after rescaling?
Well, we could use logistic regression!

I bet you're confused. Hear me out.
The term **binary** classification is confusing.
It's true that we output a binary label, but the real part is **classification** because we actually never learn a binary function from data directly!
Ok, rarely, not never.
If you insist on learning an arbitrary binary function *directly* with no structure, you are basically memorizing a look-up table, which scales horribly.
We almost always have missing data or noise in real-life, so probabilities come in for the rescue to represent those uncertainties.

### Bayes Rule and Maximum Likelihood

So, how do we learn those "probabilities"? We use the celebrated Bayes rule!

$$
\Pr[\textsf{pass} | \textsf{hours}] \Pr[\textsf{hours}] = \Pr[\textsf{hours} | \textsf{pass}] \Pr[\textsf{pass}].
$$

The unknown object of interest is $$\Pr[\textsf{pass} | \textsf{hours}]$$, which is the prediction we want to make.
We already have $$\Pr[\textsf{hours}]$$ (well, not literally, but we have samples of hours in the data).
Its exact value is not that important here as we'll see.
The probability $$\Pr[\textsf{pass}]$$ is our prior belief in the probability of passing, which can be 0.5 for equal chances if no historical evidence is available.

Here comes the interesting one: $$\Pr[\textsf{hours} | \textsf{pass}]$$.
What the hell is this?
The "probability" of having studied some given number of hours given a pass grade,
which doesn't make sense because... you got the grade, so you must know how many hours you studied already, right?
Correct. That's why they call it **likelihood**, not probability, and that's the part where we have some leeway in modeling the data generating process.

In order to determine the best $$\Pr$$, the most intuitive thing to do is to choose the probability distribution that maximizes the evidence we have collected based on the dataset.
In other words, we choose the probability distribution that maximizes the likelihood.
That process is called [maximum likelihood estimation (MLE)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maximum_likelihood_estimation),
the foundation on which most machine learning models are based.
The Bayesian upgrade to that is when we also plug in our prior beliefs on $$\Pr[\textsf{pass}]$$, which would give us the [maximum a posterior estimation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maximum_a_posteriori_estimation).

"**But my output space is unbounded**"

I hear you, but that's ok. It's easily fixable.

In that case, we can model a full conditional distribution or density for the output.
For linear regression, the standard move is to assume that the mean of this distribution follows a line and that the residual noise is normal.

### Maximum Likelihood <=> Linear Regression

The canonical example that demonstrates the generality of classification and MLE is the following one.
Let's assume that: (i) the grades follow a linear trend, and (ii) the (vertical) errors from that line follow a normal distribution.
Then, MLE gives us ordinary linear regression exactly.
See [here](https://www.statlect.com/fundamentals-of-statistics/linear-regression-maximum-likelihood), for example.
Isn't that amazing?
I still feel amazed by this equivalence.
I think it's one of the most beautiful results in learning theory.

"**But my output space is unbounded!**"

I hear you, but that's ok. It's easily fixable.

Instead of modeling predictions as $$\Pr[\textsf{pass} | \textsf{hours} = x]$$,
we use $$\Pr[\textsf{pass} | \textsf{hours} > x]$$.
Note the inequality.

There is no shortage of probability distributions out there,
but the normal distribution is most likely all you need.
In fact, many distributions are transformations of (a collection of) normal variables.
Choosing the right distribution to model the randomness or uncertainty in the data generating process is an art that comes with experience.
Recall the section "*Modeling the problem*" above and see whether the connection to process modeling makes sense or not.

---

## Machine Learning in a Nutshell

Let me recap what machine learning is:

1. Collect data from the real world.
2. Model the data generation process. (Hint: you can model only the part required for predicting a bit.)
3. Fit the model to the data.
4. Predict the future with your model. (Hint: your prediction could be a bit or a full simulation.)

That's basically it. Allow me to elaborate.

Collecting data is an extremely important part of machine learning.
Some of the biggest AI companies focus completely on this part, and Big Tech are all doing it like crazy.

Next is the modeling part, which is an art that is learned from study, practice, and experience.
It's difficult to describe algorithmically and can be extremely varied in terms of what is being modeled, how efficient the model is, and how scientifically valid or mathematically rigorous.
It usually requires translating your real-world problem to a mathematical model that is tractable, analyzable, and solvable with math.

Once we model the problem, we're halfway there.
After modeling comes the "solving", which we also denote with *fitting* or *training* the model in machine learning.
This is often exclusively the territory of optimization scientists.
Machine learning engineers often do not touch this part and assume it's correct as is.
It's difficult to make progress here because the simplest methods for training models seem to work remarkably well in practice (which is a bitter reminder for those doing research in optimization, including myself).

Finally, the prediction part is often assumed to be simple, which used to be very true since "predictions" are done constantly in modern training algorithms, i.e., models have to do a *forward pass* on the data, which is not necessarily required for simpler classes of (older) models.
Nowadays, prediction—or inference as it's usually called—is a whole science, especially for large language models.
Depending on the model, the forward pass during model training can look very different in inference.
Due to business needs, the forward pass during model inference is being pushed to be much more efficient.
This is the part that happens where we chat with language models.

---

## Concluding Thoughts

What I love about machine learning is its broad applicability to solve many tasks in life using machines.

I mean, look at what machine learning models we have nowadays.
Who knew, ten years ago, that machine learning would give us ChatGPT?

Do you know what these language models are modeling?
They are just modeling the next token ($$y$$) given a sequence of tokens ($$x$$), roughly speaking.
Given a prompt, they predict the next token.
And do you know how they predict the word after it?
I kid you not, they just append the previous token to the prompt and—you guessed it—predict the next token.
Yet here we are.
These things work *crazy* well, and the funny part is, **nobody fully knows why**. I swear.

Looking at it more deeply, the goal of machine learning has always been broad, and it's only natural that we got here.
Machine learning has always tried to *model the world*, but we only model the parts that matter to us and only use models that are solvable or trainable with tractable algorithms, i.e., algorithms that don't take forever and can work on our computers.

I hope you enjoyed this high-level(-but-sometimes-has-math) post on machine learning.
Let me know if you enjoyed it or have feedback.
I'd especially welcome feedback from people coming from non-technical background.

