---
layout: post
title:  Can coffee taste like melon?
date:   2024-09-21 00:00:00 +0000
---

Yes.

Just wanted to let you know that there exists coffee in this world that literally tastes like melon.
The coffee is from Milan farm in Colombia, roasted by Glitch Roasters in Tokyo.
[Check it out here](https://shop.glitchcoffee.com/en/products/restock-colombia-risaralda-milan-nitro-wash).
The roasters say in the link:
> This coffee is characterized by a variety of fruity flavors that will overturn your concept of coffee. It is reminiscent of a fruit basket, and comes in a variety of flavours, including melon, guava, strawberry and watermelon, and can be enjoyed as the temperature and aging process changes.

As pretentious as it may sound, they're actually right.
I'm already into coffee and know that great flavorful coffee beans exist, but I didn't know that a melon-juice level of coffee exists.
They only sell it in 100g bags and it costs ¥4,200 / bag ($27 for god's sake).
If that sounds "whopping" to you, then check out their competition-level stuff.
Pro tip: their Ginza branch is crazy busy, but their Osaka branch is much more spacious, cozy, and way less busy (and the coffee is as delicious).

You reached this far. Ok good.
Seems like you you're interested in coffee.
Might as well tell you about coffee beans that taste like blackberry-flavored chocolate ganache.
This one is from Mamuto, Kenya, roasted by George Howell.
[Here is the link](https://georgehowellcoffee.com/products/mamuto-peaberry-ken-003).
Another roaster that sources great Kenyan coffee beans is a Taiwanese roaster called KakaLove.
[They have a great selection of Kenyan coffee beans.](https://www.kakalovecafe.com.tw/categories/550002e92ed0f2264000001b)
Would love to visit these two roasters in person one day.

Finally, I need to mention this one.
I'm not exactly sure what kind of sorcery they use to roast their coffee beans, but it's so unique, I've never tasted anything like it before.
The roaster is called [Torahebi](https://www.torahebi.jp), and they are hidden in the 3rd floor of Parco in Shibuya.
They are mysterious; the origin of the coffee beans and the roasting process are unknown, and they claim that the roasting process is innovative and was invented by their head roaster who used to be a chemist.

Ok, that makes sense, but if chemistry can make my coffee taste literally like bananas without putting bananas in, then I'll be flabbergasted anyway.
I suspect this is a unique and meticulous dark-roast process, leaving some slightly bitter debris that are noticeable in espresso, so filter coffee is the better choice here.
The coffee beans themselves look oily and dark, but the fragrance is insane.
The flavor notes are equally as pronounced to the point that you will feel like the roaster had cheated somehow because it's impossible for coffee to taste like this.
They also have a strawberry blend, and the taste of a flat white made with this blend is remniscent of the strawberry milk I used to drink as a little kid.
If you're around Shibuya and you love coffee, then this one is a no-brainer.